\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename mulvoc.info
@settitle Mulvoc manual
@direntry
* mulvoc::			MUlti-Lingual VOcabulary.
@end direntry
@iftex
@finalout
@afourpaper
@end iftex
@c %**end of header
@c  Status: in progress
@titlepage
@sp 10
@title{Mulvoc}
@subtitle{MUlti-Lingual VOcabulary}
@author{by J. C. G. Sturdy}
@c The following two commands start the copyright page.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 2006 John C. G. Sturdy

Published by John C. G. Sturdy.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.
@end titlepage
@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)

@c store these by makeinfo, copying them into subdirs of htdocs, tarring them up and doing 
@c scp htdocs.tar.gz jcg_sturdy@mulvoc.sourceforge.net:/home/groups/m/mu/mulvoc 
@c then log in to mulvoc.sourceforge.net and unpack them
@ifinfo
This file documents mulvoc, the MUlti-Lingual VOcabulary system.

This document applies to version 1 of Mulvoc.
@end ifinfo

@menu
* Introduction::                Introduction
* Using Mulvoc::                 Ways of using Mulvoc
* Vocabulary files::            Vocabulary file format
* Installation::                Installating Mulvoc
* Configuration::               Configuration

@detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Vocabulary files

* Header lines::                Header lines
* Language names::              Language names
* Cell format::                 Data cell format
* Special columns::             Special columns

Configuration

* Enabling Mulvoc::              Enabling Mulvoc triggers
* Language Selection::          Selecting the languages used
* Controlling the display::     Controlling the Mulvoc display
* Selecting files::             Selecting language files

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node  Introduction, Using Mulvoc, Top, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Introduction

Mulvoc is a package of natural language vocabulary handling code for
GNUemacs. Although it could be used in a variety of ways, its original
purpose is to help the user to learn vocabulary in other languages. As
you use words in your emacs session, mulvoc flashes up translations of
words that it has in its dictionary.  It is not meant to be a
translation aid or auto translator, although the author may be tempted
to try to add such facilities later. 

Mulvoc uses a simple spreadsheet format, with a column for each
language, to hold its vocabulary data.

Mulvoc reads its vocabulary from multiple files, merging the data
together so that translations can be recognised even when the original
and target words do not occur in the same file; for example, if you
have three files each containing two languages, if file 1 gives the
translation of A as B, and file 2 gives the translation of C as D, and
file 3 gives the translation of B as C, mulvoc will recognise that D is
a translation of A.

@node  Using Mulvoc, Vocabulary files, Introduction, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Using Mulvoc

For how to install mulvoc into your Emacs system, @xref{Installation}. 

For the most part, you don't have to do anything to use mulvoc.  Simply
entering words in text will trigger mulvoc's features when the minor
mode @code{mulvoc-mode} is active. 

When you type a word that mulvoc recognises, translations of the word
will appear.  Mulvoc has three ways of displaying the translations:

@itemize
@item in the message line
@item as ToolTips
@item as overlays on the buffer text
@end itemize

@c You can control these individually; @xref{Controlling the display}. 

@node  Vocabulary files, Installation, Using Mulvoc, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Vocabulary files

@menu
* Header lines::                Header lines
* Language names::              Language names
* Cell format::                 Data cell format
* Special columns::             Special columns
@end menu

Mulvoc's vocabulary files are in the Comma Separated Value (CSV) format
supported by many spreadsheet and database programs.  There is one row
for each word (mulvoc calls this a ``meaning'' internally), and one
column per language. 

There are also some special rows, at the top of the file, and some
special columns, conventionally on the left. 

@node  Header lines, Language names, Vocabulary files, Vocabulary files
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Header lines

Each mulvoc vocabulary file must start with a header line which names
the columns. Most of the columns have language names, given as
three-letter codes in upper case; @xref{Language names}. There should
also be a column for the type of word (the ``part of speech''), which
is labelled @code{#TYPE}.

There may also be a column labelled @code{#SENSE} which indicates the
sense of the word, as some words have more than one meaning in the
same language. 

If you use the @code{#SENSE} column, you should use it consistently,
as it is used in matching up parts of the same meaning.

There can also be a row labelled (in the @code{#TYPE} column) as
@code{#LANGUAGENAME}, to specify the human readable language name. 

If you want to be able to edit vocabulary files conveniently using
mulvoc, then should be a row whose @code{#TYPE} field is
@code{#INPUT-METHODS}, and whose data cells are suitable for giving to
Emacs' input method selection commands. 

@node  Language names, Cell format, Header lines, Vocabulary files
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Language names

Mulvoc uses the three-letter language codes established by the Summer
Institute of Linguistics (SIL). These are defined in the file
LanguageCodes.tab, which is bundled with mulvoc by kind permission of
SIL.

@node Cell format, Special columns, Language names, Vocabulary files
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Data cell format

The basic cell format is the word by itself.  equivalent words can be
put in the same cell, separated by commas.

@node  Special columns,  , Cell format, Vocabulary files
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Special columns

Some of the column titles are not for languages, but are used
specially by Mulvoc.

@node  Installation, Configuration, Vocabulary files, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Installation

To install mulvoc, you need to download the tarball, and the
LanguageCodes.tab file, and put the elisp files from the bundle into a
directory on your load path. You must set up a directory to contain
the dictionaries, which by default is @file{~/dictionaries} but you
can change this by setting the emacs-lisp variable
@code{mulvoc-dictionaries-directories} (which gives a list of
directories, rather than a single directory), and put
@file{general.csv} (from the bundle) into it. Place
@file{LanguageCodes.tab} in a location pointed to by the emacs-lisp
variable @code{language-codes-file-name}, by default
@file{~/dictionaries/LanguageCodes.tab}. Then, to activate
mulvoc-mode, type @command{M-x mulvoc-mode} in a buffer where you want
it turned on. The first time you start it in an Emacs session, it will
load the language data, which is currently quite slow. (I plan to
optimize it for when there is only one dictionary file; the slow stuff
is putting together overlapping definitions from multiple
dictionaries.)

@node  Configuration,  , Installation, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Configuration

Some parts of Mulvoc still have to be configured by editing your
@file{.emacs}, and some are set up using Custom.

@menu
* Enabling Mulvoc::              Enabling Mulvoc triggers
* Language Selection::          Selecting the languages used
* Controlling the display::     Controlling the Mulvoc display
* Selecting files::             Selecting language files
@end menu

@node  Enabling Mulvoc, Language Selection, Configuration, Configuration
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Enabling Mulvoc triggers

There are two ways in which mulvoc can be triggered, one as you finish
typing each word, and one at the end of every Emacs command, including
cursor movements. 

Setting @code{mulvoc-cursor-active} non-nil causes translations of the
word at point to be displayed at every command. This happens in
buffers in which @code{mulvoc-setup-hook-function} has been run.

Setting @code{mulvoc-abbrev-active} non-nil causes the abbreviation
expansion mechanism to display translations of known words as they are
entered.

@node  Language Selection, Controlling the display, Enabling Mulvoc, Configuration
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Selecting the languages used

@code{mulvoc-displayed-languages} contains a list of the languages to
display in. If nil, all known languages are used. The language names
should be in the same format (and the same case) as used in the
vocabulary files; @xref{Language names}.

@node  Controlling the display, Selecting files, Language Selection, Configuration
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Controlling the Mulvoc display

@code{mulvoc-use-tooltips} controls whether to use tooltips, if they are available.

Tooltips and echo area messages are very transient, and can easily
disappear before you have read them, particularly if you are typing
fast, or using voice input.  Mulvoc can use overlays to display the
translations after the words that they refer to.  To enable this, set
@code{mulvoc-use-overlays} as required:

@itemize
@item
If nil, mulvoc does not use overlays.
@item
If a number, it uses that many of them, per buffer. As more overlays
are created, old ones are destroyed to reduce clutter.
@item
If anything else, it uses any number of them.
@end itemize

@node  Selecting files,  , Controlling the display, Configuration
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Selecting language files

@code{mulvoc-dictionaries-directories} contains a list of directories
containing dictionaries.

@code{mulvoc-dictionaries-pattern} is a regular expression describing
the filenames (within each directory in
@code{mulvoc-dictionaries-directories}) holding the vocabulary.  It
should normally be @code{".csv$"}. 

@bye
